Hello


Do you consider yourself to have a disability? I must stress that if you do but do not wish to disclose it, it is perfectly fine to answer this question with a no.

How would you define disability

The Act defines a disabled person as a person with a disability. A person has a disability for the purposes of the Act if he or she has a physical or mental impairment and the impairment has a substantial and long-term adverse effect on his or her ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities (S6(1)).

What do you think of this definition

•	the person must have an impairment that is either physical or mental (see paragraphs A3 to A8);
•	the impairment must have adverse effects which are substantial(see Section B);
•	the substantial adverse effects must be long-term (see Section C);and
•	the long-term substantial adverse effects must be effects onnormal day-to-day activities (see Section D).


What do you make of the terms substantial

long term

everyday activities

•	the person must have an impairment that is either physical or mental (see paragraphs A3 to A8);
•	the impairment must have adverse effects which are substantial(see Section B);
•	the substantial adverse effects must be long-term (see Section C);and
•	the long-term substantial adverse effects must be effects onnormal day-to-day activities (see Section D).



The definition requires that the effects which a person may experience must arise from a physical or mental impairment. The term mental or physical impairment should be given its ordinary meaning. It is not necessary for the cause of the impairment to be established, nor does the impairment have to be the result of an illness. In many cases,there will be no dispute whether a person has an impairment. Any disagreement is more likely to be about whether the effects of the impairment are sufficient to fall within the definition and in particular whether they are long-term. Even so, it may sometimes be necessary to decide whether a person has an impairment so as to be able to deal with the issues about its effects.

the act also covers discrimination based on percieved disability


It is not necessary to consider how an impairment is caused, evenif the cause is a consequence of a condition which is excluded. Forexample, liver disease as a result of alcohol dependency would countas an impairment, although an addiction to alcohol itself is expresslyexcluded from the scope of the definition of disability in the Act. Whatit is important to consider is the effect of an impairment, not its cause– provided that it is not an excluded condition. (See also paragraph

special provisions there are special provisions for certain people who otherwise do not meet the definition.


The exclusions apply where the tendency to set fires, tendency to steal, tendency to physical or sexual abuse of other persons, exhibitionism, or voyeurism constitute an impairment in themselves.The exclusions also apply where these tendencies arise as aconsequence of, or a manifestation of, an impairment that constitutesa disability for the purposes of the Act. It is important to determinethe basis for the alleged discrimination. If the alleged discriminationwas a result of an excluded condition, the exclusion will apply.However, if the alleged discrimination was specifically related tothe actual disability which gave rise to the excluded condition, theexclusion will not apply. Whether the exclusion applies will depend onall the facts of the individual case.
as a disabled person if he or she has an accompanying impairment The Act states that this provision does not apply to sight impairments to the extent that they are capable of correction by spectacles orcontact lenses. (Sch1, Para 5(3)). In other words, the only effects onthe ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities which are to beconsidered are those which remain when spectacles or contact lensesare used (or would remain if they were used). This does not includethe use of devices to correct sight which are not spectacles or contactlenses
hayfever

Regulations provide that a disfigurement which consists of a tattoo(which has not been removed) is not to be considered as a severedisfigurement. Also excluded is a piercing of the body for decorativepurposes including anything attached through the piercing7.


@@@ substantial meaning of
it means an adverse effect on normal day-today activities should be a substantial one reflects the generalunderstanding of disability as a limitation going beyond the normaldifferences in ability which may exist among people. A substantialeffect is one that is more than a minor or trivial effect.
The time taken to carry out an activity B2.The time taken by a person with an impairment to carry out a normalday-to-day activity should be considered when assessing whether theeffect of that impairment is substantial. It should be compared withthe time it might take a person who did not have the impairment tocomplete an activity.

Another factor to be considered when assessing whether the effect of an impairment is substantial is the way in which a person with thatimpairment carries out a normal day-to-day activity. The comparisonshould be with the way that the person might be expected to carryout the activity compared with someone who does not have theimpairment.A person who has obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) constantlychecks and rechecks that electrical appliances are switched off andthat the doors are locked when leaving home. A person without thedisorder would not normally carry out these frequent checks. Theneed to constantly check and recheck has a substantial adverseeffect.

An impairment might not have a substantial adverse effect on aperson’s ability to undertake a particular day-to-day activity inisolation. However, it is important to consider whether its effects onmore than one activity, when taken together, could result in an overallsubstantial adverse effect.
@@>

If somone has multiple impairements the effect of the combination should be considered when determining whether it fits the critieria

@@@ everyday activities

Whether a person is disabled for the purposes of the Act is generallydetermined by reference to the effect that an impairment has on thatperson’s ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities. An exceptionto this is a person with severe disfigurement (see paragraph B24). Itis not possible to provide an exhaustive list of conditions that qualifyas impairments for the purposes of the Act. Any attempt to do sowould inevitably become out of date as medical knowledge advanced.
Similarly, it would be reasonable to expect a person with a phobiato avoid extreme activities or situations ect him or her to give up,or modify, normal activities that might exacerbate the symptoms.A person with acrophobia (extreme fear of heights which can inducepanic attacks) might reasonably be expected to avoid the top of

Account should also be taken of where a person avoids doingthings which, for example, cause pain, fatigue or substantial socialembarrassment, or avoids doing things because of a loss of energyand motivation.

In some cases, people have coping or avoidance strategies whichcease to work in certain circumstances (for example, where someonewho has dyslexia is placed under stress). If it is possible that a person’sability to manage the effects of an impairment will break down sothat effects will sometimes still occur, this possibility must be takeninto account when assessing the effects of the impairment.

In general, day-to-day activities are things people do on a regularor daily basis, and examples include shopping, reading and writing,having a conversation or using the telephone, watching television,getting washed and dressed, preparing and eating food, carrying outhousehold tasks, walking and travelling by various forms of transport,and taking part in social activities. Normal day-to-day activities caninclude general work-related activities, and study and educationrelated activities, such as interacting with colleagues, followinginstructions, using a computer, driving, carrying out interviews,preparing written documents, and keeping to a timetable or a shiftpattern.

The term ‘normal day-to-day activities’ is not intended to includeactivities which are normal only for a particular person, or a smallgroup of people. In deciding whether an activity is a normal day-today activity, account should be taken of how far it is carried out bypeople on a daily or frequent basis. In this context, ‘normal’ should begiven its ordinary, everyday meaning.

A normal day-to-day activity is not necessarily one that is carried outby a majority of people. For example, it is possible that some activitiesmight be carried out only, or more predominantly, by people of aparticular gender, such as breast-feeding or applying make-up, andcannot therefore be said to be normal for most people. They wouldnevertheless be considered to be normal day-to-day activities.

Also, whether an activity is a normal day-to-day activity should notbe determined by whether it is more normal for it to be carried out ata particular time of day. For example, getting out of bed and gettingdressed are activities that are normally associated with the morning.They may be carried out much later in the day by workers who worknight shifts, but they would still be considered to be normal day-today activities.@@>@@@ D7. In considering the ability of a child aged six or over to carry out anormal day-to-day activity, it is necessary to take account of the levelof achievement which would be normal for a person of a similar age.(See also Section E (Disabled children).)

Specialised activities D8.Where activities are themselves highly specialised or involve highlyspecialised levels of attainment, they would not be regarded asnormal day-to-day activities for most people. In some instances workrelated activities are so highly specialised that they would not beregarded as normal day-to-day activities. faf
 D9.The same is true of other specialised activities such as playing amusical instrument to a high standard of achievement; taking partin activities where very specific skills or level of ability are required;or playing a particular sport to a high level of ability, such as wouldbe required for a professional footballer or athlete. Where activitiesinvolve highly specialised skills or levels of attainment, they would notbe regarded as normal day-to-day activities for most people.
 D10.	However, many types of specialised work-related or other activitiesmay still involve normal day-to-day activities which can be adverselyaffected by an impairment. For example they may involve normalactivities such as: sitting down, standing up, walking, running,verbal interaction, writing, driving; using everyday objects such asa computer keyboard or a mobile phone, and lifting, or carryingeveryday objects, such as a vacuum cleaner.

 A person with a physical impairment may, because of pain or
 fatigue, experience difficulties in carrying out normal activities thatinvolve mental processes.
  D17.	Some impairments may have an adverse impact on the ability of aperson to carry out normal day-to-day communication activities. Forexample, they may adversely affect whether a person is able to speakclearly at a normal pace and rhythm and to understand someone elsespeaking normally in the person’s native language. Some impairmentscan have an adverse effect on a person’s ability to understand humannon-factual information and non-verbal communication such as bodylanguage and facial expressions. Account should be taken of how suchfactors can have an adverse effect on normal day-to-day activities.

 A person’s impairment may have an adverse effect on day-to- dayactivities that require an ability to co-ordinate their movements, tocarry everyday objects such as a kettle of water, a bag of shopping, abriefcase, or an overnight bag, or to use standard items of equipment.A young man who has dyspraxia experiences a range of effects whichinclude difficulty co-ordinating physical movements. He is frequentlyknocking over cups and bottles of drink and cannot combine twoactivities at the same time, such as walking while holding a plate offood upright, without spilling the food.This has a substantial adverse effect on his ability to carry outnormal day-to-day activities such as making a drink and eating.
@@>

@@@ environmental conditions
may exacerbate or lessen the effect ofan impairment. Factors such as temperature, humidity, lighting, thetime of day or night, how tired the person is, or how much stress heor she is under, may have an impact on the effects. When assessingwhether adverse effects of an impairment are substantial, the extentto which such environmental factors, individually or cumulatively,are likely to have an impact on the effects should, therefore, also beconsidered. The fact that an impairment may have a less substantialeffect in certain environments does not necessarily prevent it havingan overall substantial adverse effect on day-to-day activities



@@ Environmental effects D20.Environmental conditions may have an impact on how an impairmentaffects a person’s ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities.Consideration should be given to the level and nature of anyenvironmental effect. Account should be taken of whether it is withinsuch a range and of such a type that most people would be able tocarry out an activity without an adverse effect. For example, whetherbackground noise or lighting is of a type or level that would enablemost people to hear or see adequately. (See also paragraph B11.)A woman has tinnitus which makes it difficult for her to hear orunderstand normal conversations. She cannot hear and respond towhat a supermarket checkout assistant is saying if the two peoplebehind her in the queue are holding a conversation at the same time.This has a substantial adverse effect on her ability to carry out thenormal day-to-day activity of taking part in a conversation.

correction measures for an impairment, the effect of the impairmenton day-to-day activities is to be taken as that which the person wouldexperience without the treatment or measures. (See also paragraphsB12 to B17.)A man has a hearing impairment which has the effect that he cannothold a conversation with another person even in a quiet environment.He has a hearing aid which overcomes that effect. However, it is theeffect of the impairment without the hearing aid that needs to beconsidered.In this case, the impairment has a substantial adverse effect on theday-to-day activity of holding a conversation.D24.	If a person’s sight is corrected by spectacles or contact lenses, orcould be corrected by them, what needs to be considered is anyadverse effect that the visual impairment has on the ability to carryout normal day-to-day activities which remains while the person is


Some provisions in the Act apply where persons share a protectedcharacteristic. In the case of disability, the Act states that a referenceto persons who share a particular characteristic is a reference topersons who have the same disability (S6(3)).
For the purposes of the provisions that apply specifically to peoplewho share a protected characteristic, the disabled man would sharethe protected characteristic with other people who have mobilityimpairments.
@@>


@@@ Effects of treatment
 B12. The Act provides that, where an impairment is subject to treatmentor correction, the impairment is to be treated as having a substantialadverse effect if, but for the treatment or correction, the impairment islikely to have that effect. In this context, ‘likely’ should be interpretedas meaning ‘could well happen’. The practical effect of this provisionis that the impairment should be treated as having the effect thatit would have without the measures in question (Sch1, Para 5(1)).The Act states that the treatment or correction measures which areto be disregarded for these purposes include, in particular, medicaltreatment and the use of a prosthesis or other aid (Sch1, Para 5(2)).In this context, medical treatments would include treatments suchas counselling, the need to follow a particular diet, and therapies,in addition to treatments with drugs. (See also paragraphs B7 andB16.)
 B13. This provision applies even if the measures result in the effects beingcompletely under control or not at all apparent. Where treatment iscontinuing it may be having the effect of masking or amelioratinga disability so that it does not have a substantial adverse effect. Ifthe final outcome of such treatment cannot be determined, or if it isknown that removal of the medical treatment would result in either arelapse or a worsened condition, it would be reasonable to disregardthe medical treatment in accordance with paragraph 5 of Schedule 1.

Account should be taken of where the effect of the continuingmedical treatment is to create a permanent improvement rather thana temporary improvement. It is necessary to consider whether, as aconsequence of the treatment, the impairment would cease to havea substantial adverse effect. For example, a person who developspneumonia may be admitted to hospital for treatment including acourse of antibiotics. This cures the impairment and no substantialeffects remain. (See also paragraph C11, regarding medical orother treatment that permanently reduces or removes the effectsof an impairment.)

However, if a person receives treatment which cures a condition thatwould otherwise meet the definition of a disability, the person wouldbe protected by the Act as a person who had a disability in the past.(See paragraph A16.)

 If medical or other treatment is likely to permanently cure a conditionand therefore remove the impairment, so that recurrence of its effectswould then be unlikely even if there were no further treatment, thisshould be taken into consideration when looking at the likelihood ofrecurrence of those effects. However, if the treatment simply delaysor prevents a recurrence, and a recurrence would be likely if thetreatment stopped, as is the case with most medication, then thetreatment is to be ignored and the effect is to be regarded as likely to

In addition, it is possible that the way in which a person can control orcope with the effects of an impairment may not always be successful.For example, this may be because an avoidance routine is difficult toadhere to, or itself adversely affects the ability to carry out day-to-dayactivities, or because the person is in an unfamiliar environment. Ifthere is an increased likelihood that the control will break down, it willbe more likely that there will be a recurrence.
@@>
@@@ Progressive conditions
B18.Progressive conditions, which are conditions that have effects whichincrease in severity over time, are subject to the special provisionsset out in Sch1, Para 8. These provisions provide that a person witha progressive condition is to be regarded as having an impairmentwhich has a substantial adverse effect on his or her ability to carry outnormal day-to-day activities before it actually has that effect.
@@ Severe disfigurements B24.The Act provides that where an impairment consists of a severedisfigurement, it is to be treated as having a substantial adverse effecton the person’s ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities. Thereis no need to demonstrate such an effect (Sch1, Para 3).A lady has significant scarring to her face as a result of a bonfireaccident. The woman uses skin camouflage to cover the scars as sheis very self conscious about her appearance. She avoids large crowdsand bright lights including public transport and supermarkets andshe does not socialise with people outside her family in case theynotice the mark and ask her questions about it.This amounts to a substantial adverse effect. However, the Actdoes not require her to show that her disfigurement has this effectbecause it provides for a severe disfigurement to be treated ashaving a substantial adverse effect on the person’s ability to carryout normal day-to-day activities.

Disfigurements count except where they are voluntary as in the case of tattoos


Long Term

Meaning of ‘long-term effects’ C1.The Act states that, for the purpose of deciding whether a person isdisabled, a long-term effect of an impairment is one:•	 which has lasted at least 12 months; or•	 where the total period for which it lasts, from the time of the firstonset, is likely to be at least 12 months; or•	 which is likely to last for the rest of the life of the person affected(Sch1, Para 2).Special provisions apply when determining whether the effects of animpairment that has fluctuating or recurring effects are long-term.(See paragraphs C5 to C11).

he cumulative effect of related impairments should be taken intoaccount when determining whether the person has experienceda long-term effect for the purposes of meeting the definition ofa disabled person.
The Act states that, if an impairment has had a substantial adverseeffect on a person’s ability to carry out normal day-to-day activitiesbut that effect ceases, the substantial effect is treated as continuingif it is likely to recur.
It is not necessary for the effect to be the same throughout the periodwhich is being considered in relation to determining whether the‘long-term’ element of the definition is met. A person may still satisfythe long-term element of the definition even if the effect is not the same throughout the period. It may change: for example activitieswhich are initially very difficult may become possible to a much greater extent.




Likelihood of recurrence C9.Likelihood of recurrence should be considered taking all thecircumstances of the case into account. This should include what theperson could reasonably be expected to do to prevent the recurrence.

past disability is also partially covered

 Schedule 9 paragraph 1 of the Act provides that it is notdiscrimination, under a range of work provisions, for it to be anoccupational requirement that the job holder has a particularprotected characteristic.
